Dear young people, dear believers, here
we are on the third Thursday as we reflect
on the cycle of lectures about love,
about relationships, about marriage,
and about partnerships, and so on.
I do not know whether you have watched
this, and whether you often go to
restaurants, or not, but you have
surely been, at least now and then.
When you go to a restaurant for dinner
or lunch, there are literally two
kinds of people: those who immediately
know what they want to eat, just as
we Bosnians do, and who will speak up
at once if they have it; if not, then
something similar will have to do.
So you have those people in a restaurant
who know exactly what they want to eat,
and when the waiter comes over, if that
isn’t quite it, they know roughly what
they want, they order promptly, and
they wait for their meal to arrive.
And then you have the other, larger
group of people who simply do not
know what they want to eat at all.
Then they start pestering the waiter
with questions: "what's this?", "how
is this?", "is it like this or that?",
and sometimes even go to the extent
of peering at other people's tables,
and they keep asking other guests
what kind of food they're eating.
Primarily, you encounter that other
group of people who never really
know what it is that they want.
So, however much the waiter explains it
in a very kindly, patient way, they still
don't know what it is that they want.
You see, the most important thing in love,
in a relationship, when you are preparing
yourself, and especially for marriage,
is that you truly know what you want.
If you happen to get the order of food
wrong, if you happen to pick the wrong
film at the cinema, if you happen
to mess up the coffee, or something
sweet, it's not a problem at all.
It won't spoil your life that much.
But if you don't know what you want
from a relationship or from marriage,
that can seriously complicate your
life in ways you might not expect.
Sometimes people go into relationships
or unions because of a powerful
chemistry between them, and they allow
themselves to fall into the relationship
simply because they have noticed
that the other person wants it, and
they feel good about it at the time.
Yet some people indeed—quite a few,
as I have come to know—find themselves
in some kind of relationship, perhaps
even in marriage, and still they
do not know what they truly want
from it, for quite a while now.
Therefore, when we talk about marriage, a
relationship, or a long-term partnership,
it is not something that can be
treated like simply ordering a meal.
If you do not know in precise
terms what you want, it can
lead to, and perhaps result in,
substantial and lasting difficulties.
So the very first thing you should
consider this evening is: are you
truly certain about what you want?
Are you certain about, exactly,
with whom you really want to be
together and share your life?
Are you certain about precisely what
you are prepared to accept, and about
what you are not prepared to accept?
There exists a book by a female
author in which she explains this
distinction very clearly and accessibly.
She compares it to a traffic
light, a familiar image that
serves as sound guidance.
We know that traffic lights display
colours, after all, including red, amber,
and green, but this is wise counsel.
Consequently, if you know exactly what
you want from another person, there
is a considerably lower chance that
you will end up placing yourself in
awkward, uncomfortable situations.
So first we acknowledge,
in this moment, that at the
traffic light the signal is red.
Do you truly know, inside yourself,
the criteria and attitudes that your
partner would simply not accept?
If something is flagged as red—meaning
it is forbidden—and if it is something
that can no longer be tolerated under
any circumstance, you pull the handbrake
to stop the situation immediately.
So how is it that there are some
things about your partner that you
simply cannot bear, and yet you still
continue to go out with them, to spend
time with them, to see them socially?
We keep returning to the original
question we started with.
Obviously you do not know, with
complete certainty, the exact profile
of a person, and you do not know
exactly what it is that you want.
So when I say there are things you
simply cannot accept in another
person, obviously not all of us hold
identical views on these matters.
Some people simply cannot get past
that issue, even when there is
chemistry between you, even when
you like that person very much; you
cannot accept, for instance, that
your partner is addicted to something.
You cannot accept that
he is not a believer.
And so on, and so forth.
Do you, Sunce, know precisely at what
point inside you there exists something
you simply cannot accept about your
believing partner if you are preparing
yourselves for marriage, and you are
thinking ahead, and you know exactly what
you want in the marriage you are working
toward, as you are growing up together,
choosing a life you both want to build,
and considering how you would handle
disagreements and differences in beliefs.
Or should we rationalise.
So, for you young people, it is often the
case that we rationalise under two kinds
of emotion: the thrill of infatuation
and the sanctity of someone else’s.
And then we begin to justify, or perhaps
rationalise, that all of this will, in
fact, eventually change, that the person
under the overwhelming influence of
your powerful love will change, indeed.
That is the greatest, most
staggering lie of all.
You know, from psychology, that
there exist four very different
kinds of character, and that a
character does not truly change.
And indeed, character can be
influenced only to a limited extent.
But when someone is like that,
and especially if you do not know
what you want, then you must know
precisely what you do not want in
your girlfriend or in your boyfriend.
At any cost, no matter what, even if your
emotions tremble and flutter inside you,
and even if your ears feel warm to the
touch, and your heart leaps and races
like a hare's, this will not pass, at all.
Because this is what most often
happens, and later there are dramas
in marriage, so I thought, I thought.
No, now kindly open your eyes.
Tonight, when you finally come
home, don't watch the series;
write to the census, indeed.
So, just as at the customs,
this will simply not pass.
This enters a field of inquiry in
which there is no room for compromise
or concession, a field that demands
unwavering clarity and firm principle.
Secondly, it can also offer
something of value, something
useful that carries meaning.
I meet people; I encounter many kinds
of people, and yet no one is perfect.
We all have certain flaws; we
all carry certain wounds; and in
the end, no one is truly perfect.
But we should still give
certain things a fair chance,
a real opportunity to develop.
And that is then the yellow light, a
signal that indicates cautious progress.
If you have doubts or uncertainties about
your partner, and you feel uncertain about
different aspects of your relationship,
perhaps in terms of how he or she
behaves in certain situations, of course,
that is the place where work happens.
And where there are already some
things you can become acquainted
with, accept, and communicate
about, perhaps even change.
So, do you know at this very moment of
some field, something that is unknown to
you in your partner, or your partner’s
husband or wife, something you would
like to explore, study, ask about,
demand an explanation for, something
that isn’t on the immediate blacklist,
something that could still pass, and of
course those things when we know what
we want are the ones most of you have;
and these are also some things that
fall under a green light and can pass.
But exactly what do you put
beneath this green field?
What exactly do you place so that it can
pass straight away with your partner?
And here, despite the green field, you
commit one small but telling mistake.
As I just said a moment ago, you
are not merely arranging an evening
out; you are preparing for marriage
and a life of forty, fifty, sixty
years together with someone.
And it is very good indeed that you
know clearly what you want, and that
your partner knows what you want.
Let it all stay a little shallow for the
moment, so when he says what is it that
passes immediately with you, coming from
your partner, and then the emphasis begins
to grow—on beauty, on eyes, on a haircut,
on this, on that figure, on voice, on
eyebrows, on lips, and the manner in which
you carry yourself, to every glance and
gesture, and the expression you show as
you listen and respond in that moment now.
Well, you can clearly see
exactly what this whole green
thing ultimately comes down to.
It all boils down to aesthetics—the
outward appearance and the
overall stylistic surface.
Of course that's the first thing, but
you mustn't put that in this context.
That is part of what passes these days.
Wouldn't it be nicer to say
about my partner, or partners?
I do like my partner; see, I
watch him and I notice how he
behaves toward children today.
So he knows how to play with children,
and he does so with patience and joy.
I see in my partner; I watch him; he
serves others, and that shows he is
helpful, reliable, and considerate.
I see my girlfriend stressing her
faith; she goes to church often.
That means you must place other
priorities first—those that suit you,
those that open wide the doors to your
heart, and then the physical appearance,
the description of that person.
Describe the person physically,
but you know nothing about her.
You don't know at all about your family's
origins or how to properly behave
toward your parents in day-to-day life.
My dear, you'll truly get to know
your partners best by how they
talk about their parents today,
and what that reveals about them.
And visit their home to see who does the
dishes, whether your partner is the one
washing up or looking after their nails.
So these are truly great moments
when you can learn a lot more about
what can give you the green light
for a good, lasting relationship.
The aim here is not to study a
physical trip, but rather to examine,
in depth, what makes your love endure
and stay strong for a lifetime.
I have just mentioned, indeed, a character
a moment ago, perhaps in passing, as well.
And of course we have a psychological
character within us, yet we also
recognize that there is a single common
problem present in your relationships.
That is, it concerns the emotional
temperament we truly discuss here.
Have you perhaps given any serious,
careful thought to that at all?
I frequently meet people in pastoral
care and hear, time and again, that
many partners, especially those who
are married, are dealing with this.
If, in their view, his or her partner
is an emotionally unavailable person.
That is to say, when you read the
literature on emotionally unavailable
people, psychology typically describes
either that they have already endured
some pain or trauma, or that they
are presently going through it,
as many researchers have noted.
And therefore it is a defence
mechanism, which is why walls are
built between people, and you become
emotionally unavailable as a defence
mechanism, precisely so that you
and your heart can be shielded
from being hurt by others, at all.
Unfortunately many people shield
themselves in this way, and many
have problems in relationships,
because I recall a young couple who
do not live in the same country.
They are in a relationship; they see
each other physically sometimes, but they
are often communicating by telephone.
And that girl says, every
time I end a call, I come and
cry immediately and I end it.
And why?
Because during that call she opens
up emotionally, reveals her true
self, reveals her feelings, while
in return she receives only silence.
Or would you spend your entire life
with someone who is emotionally
unavailable to you, a person who
cannot meet your emotional needs?
So you end up talking to a
brick wall day after day.
There is no feedback, no reciprocation,
because you might presently be with
an emotionally unavailable person
who has to work on solving their
own problem first for themselves.
And that is one of those kinds of
temperaments that people sometimes accept.
But perhaps you think that
this is the absolute worst.
Umm, no, there’s always something
worse out there somewhere.
You have these, these sunshines
of mine—emotional, dependent
people who often cling to others.
These are the people whom someone hurt
in the past, whom someone abandoned at
some point, whom someone left behind.
And such people, with every breakup,
with every departure, experience it
so traumatically, so intensely, that
they suffer in a way that makes them
grow even more emotionally dependent
on just about anyone they meet, and
tied to them for a long time, too.
And when they enter a new relationship,
they know nothing else but to
love with all their hearts and
with every fibre of their being.
And what do they do?
They think that if they give
more, ask less, and love more
every day, with patience and hope,
they will save the relationship.
So, since no one returns their love
to such people, they will sacrifice
themselves to a great extent,
bathe in love, pouring out their
feelings, hoping this will be enough.
They cannot admit a breakup; they
cannot accept that someone else might
not want to be with them anymore.
They cling to the idea that love
alone can fix everything, truly now.
They will do anything at all, throw
themselves wholly and completely
into that relationship so that they
do not have to receive anything
in return—just to have you.
And now look, there are two groups:
emotionally unavailable people, and
those who throw themselves at love,
and do not expect anything in return.
Where are we in that story,
exactly, at this moment now?
Perhaps here in this context,
there are really some who are
emotionally unavailable, and perhaps
there are those who do not expect
love from others; they will love.
They will do more, and they will
do better; they ask for absolutely
nothing in return, but they will kiss.
Most of the time we find ourselves
in the middle and stay there.
That is not a problem.
Most often we have both sides
with us, side by side, ready
to balance things as they come.
So please take a moment to think
about which type you fall into today.
When the shortcomings of other people
distract us and pull our attention
away from what truly matters, we find
ourselves facing one fundamental problem.
We have no time or energy left to
properly deal with our own faults.
We ourselves often carry faults of
our own, yet if we, as we so often
hear in confessions and in everyday
conversations, direct all our focus
solely to the faults of our partner,
husband or wife, and fail to see any
fault in ourselves, then neither the
relationship, nor the bond we share,
nor the marriage itself can be saved.
Every proper and lasting repair of any
relationship begins with the awareness
of my own self and with the patient,
ongoing work of resolving my problems.
Therefore, what matters most in
any relationship is that you are
honest and sincere in your dealings.
Many people are afraid to reveal
themselves, and many people
are truly afraid to open up.
However, if we understand all of these
blocks, and all of these emotional
states, how then can one enter
into a deeper and more meaningful
relationship with another person?
One of the things that also tends
to happen in situations like this
is that a couple who have just met
can suddenly rush headlong into a
deep level of feeling and intimacy,
sometimes catching them unawares.
Imagine strolling beside the water’s
edge, by the sea, with someone you
have only just met, and yet you
already feel the urge to dive in deep.
Because you bring with you a great
deal of trust, you tend to open up too
quickly, and that can lead to problems.
The process of opening up and building a
real connection does not occur gradually
and safely; instead, it tends to arrive
abruptly, taking you by surprise.
Here's my advice to you: start
with total honesty and take things
slowly, at your own comfortable
pace, one careful step after another.
First, go into the shallow with your
honest self, with your expectations,
and with your emotions, listening
to your inner voice and naming
what you feel and what you need.
Begin by connecting in the shallow, and
then, once you have already caught the
rhythm of emotional connection, once
that rhythm has taken hold and grown
stronger, step into still deeper and
deeper relationships, allow yourself time
to observe how you respond, and how your
partner responds, and keep listening,
keep learning, and keep your boundaries
clear as you grow together right now.
The core problem is this: when you
have only just begun to know each
other for a week, for two weeks, or
even a month, you end up spilling
out every single detail all at once.
Boom!
You fling open the doors of your
life and reveal everything you are.
And then you overwhelm the other person.
Because you must have real feelings
for the person you are dating.
Because it isn’t healthy if one
person starts to open up and the
other... And secondly, it can
be either too much or too fast.
So you need to learn to gauge
it, to pace it appropriately.
Depth becomes the very place within
us where you should seek to form
meaningful connections with others,
and never fall into despair.
And I believe that it is everyone's
deepest longing to connect with another
person in a genuine, heartfelt way, to be
seen and to belong, and that longing is
what marks a good relationship, a trace
of true holiness, and not of despair.
Look, I mentioned a moment ago that
there are emotionally closed people,
emotionally open people, and those
who rush at us with their love in
a way that can feel overwhelming,
sometimes gentle, sometimes heavy.
However, where, in all honesty, can one
possibly find any middle ground, a place
where such a thing would really work?
When it comes to opening the
heart and practising honesty,
that is, simply put: find it.
I don’t know if, when you are strolling
down the street, you look at gates—every
gate, the way it stands, the way it opens.
For me that image has lingered since
the blessings once bestowed on houses,
and I always carefully observe what
kinds of gates there are, which ones
are open, which ones are easily opened,
which are operated by remote control,
which are opened by a key, who must
go out to open it and cannot possibly
do so unless he goes out personally.
There must exist, for every context and
in every possible circumstance, such
a gate, a gate of this kind, that can
always be opened and always closed, no
matter what the circumstances may be.
It is dangerous for us when our heart
is kept closed at all times, or kept
in a state of being permanently open.
Therefore our heart must possess such a
gate which, as I would say, can be opened
whenever it is needed, can be opened
smoothly, readily, but in the event of
danger and need can be closed again.
What is it that love is not at all?
Love, of course, certainly isn't easy,
and we must never lose hope, or give up.
You, my sun, in love you must bravely
and patiently fight, but never,
ever, fight against one another,
for love requires unity and respect.
Unfortunately, it often ends
up in petty or heated disputes
that test patience and loyalty.
Rac, the ongoing fight, one against the
other, that never truly ends, unless
both choose to listen and forgive.
In love you fight, but not
one against the other; rather,
one for the other, together.
You must indeed fight for each other,
because no one is truly perfect now.
What is allowed for all of you in
that war of love is to wage a patient,
honest fight against yourselves,
against your weaknesses, against
your imperfections, against your
faults, and for your relationship—your
partnership, your marriage—so that
your love can shine more clearly in
the light you share with one another.
What I must emphasise, and what must be
understood as coming into the mix of our
understanding of love, is the essential
and careful merging and balancing of the
very notion of love with sexual relations.
Therefore, sex is not love in any sense,
and you must keep this clearly in mind.
It is the outward expression of a
certain, perhaps somewhat peculiar, form
of your own love, but sex is not the
direct route or pathway toward love.
You must remember this again and again.
Some people think that if
they enter into such intimate
relationships, then it is love.
No.
For that, in no way, constitutes
the direct path toward love, but is
instead merely a particular means of
expressing one of the loves you bear.
And one more thing that is particularly
important to remember at the end:
when love does come upon you, the
story does not simply end there.
Keep this distinction in mind,
always; please remember this.
You are happy, you are in love; you
either love someone or someone loves
you, and there, precisely the point
where it should come to a stop.
You all know that that word love
is today so commercialised, so
endlessly interpreted in hundreds
of ways by people everywhere.
From a Christian perspective, true love is
sacrifice, the kind of giving that calls
for self-denial and steady commitment.
And true love must be nourished
by reciprocity, attended to
with mutual care day by day.
If love does not wholly transform
our lives, then it is not true love.
Because, for example, is love really
love when you are the one who marries
and then you have a child; the child
cries, and the partner with whom you
have agreed to build a life together
rises to watch over the child, to comfort
it, and you, out of love, rise too.
Is that love?
Yes, it is.
For love is sacrifice.
You will not allow only your partner
to suffer with the child, to try
to soothe it to sleep; you will
rise as well and stand by her side,
encouraging her, and sharing the
responsibility that comes with parenting.
What I mean is this: true love and a
proper relationship, and true partners,
do not expect anyone to flood me with
tenderness, with constant attention,
with love, and with sacrifice.
Rather, true partners of true
love strive to support their
partner through hard times.
Remember this: true love aims to support
its partner in difficult moments.
Whether it concerns a child,
concerns work, concerns a family,
or concerns anything at all, when
you see that your partner is facing
a challenge, you should be there.
Because she feels that with you,
in sincere silence, she talks
about the problem; sunshine—that
is what love is to her.
For your partner cannot rest
if you are not well, and he
cannot bear to see you suffer.
If you do not solve the problem, it is not
only your problem, but it also comes from
your partner, and he always wants to share
everything with you, without hesitation.
And now I will tell you
all sorts of things.
Amen.